# Drug-Gene Mapping for Tahoe-100M

## Introduction

The purpose of this part of the repository is to integrate multiple datasets to retrieve, for each drug applied in the [Tahoe-100M paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.02.20.639398v1), a list of genes targeted by that drug. The goal is to identify targets as high as possible in the gene regulatory cascade.

## Repository Structure

### 1. `utils`  
Contains utility functions used in the main script.

### 2. `main.py`  
Performs preprocessing and matching across datasets.

### 3. `/data`  
This folder includes all datasets/data used, with the exception of the unprocessed and processed DTC dataset (excluded due to size).

- **Unprocessed DTC**: [Download here](http://drugtargetcommons.fimm.fi/static/Excell_files/DTC_data.csv)  
- **Processed DTC**: Can be generated by running the `main.py` script.

### Dataset/data Descriptions

- **`chEMBL.tsv`, `dgidb.tsv`, `getdb.txt`, `gpt.csv`, `gpt_df2.pkl`**:  
  These are unprocessed datasets.  
  - `gpt.csv`: Created by querying GPT as per [this issue](https://github.com/ArcInstitute/arc-virtual-cell-atlas/issues/13).  
  - `gpt_df2.pkl`: Cleaned version of `gpt.csv` where most parentheses in the compound names were removed (since parenthetical content doesn't influence gene targeting).

- **`*_processed`**:  
  Processed datasets (cleaned, normalized, and grouped). For each drug, we use simple lists to store the associated gene information.

- **`drugs.pkl`**: List of drugs applied in the Tahoe-100M paper.  
- **`drugs_changed.pkl`**: Unique drug names after removing parentheses.  
- **`drugs_gpt2.pkl`**: Non-unique drug names after removing parentheses.

- **`mixed_df2.pkl`**: Dataset after matching with `drugs_changed`.  
- **`simplified_df2.pkl`**: A simplified version of `mixed_df2`, containing only the `compound` and `gene names` columns for each dataset.

- **`dataset_x_drug2.pkl`**: For each drug, lists which datasets contain gene targets.  
- **`final_dataset.pkl`**: Final drug-gene mapping after applying quality filters (defined in `main.py`).

### Final Note

To determine the final gene targets for each drug, we applied a **lax intersection rule**: genes were considered valid if they appeared in **at least 2 out of 4** datasets among `gpt2`, `dgidb`, `getdb`, and `chEMBL`(see `main.py` for more info).